here's another
rule pursue what is Meaningful not what
is
expedient this is also a great thing to
know I think that's a tricky rule
expedient might
be we're going to have a
conversation and I want something from
you and a lot of conversations are like
that you know because you have a goal in
mind this is what I want from this
person and so then you craft your
conversation to what you want right you
subordinate your words to your to the
ethic of your
desire and you might say well what's
wrong with that well what do you know
about what you
want like haven't you been wrong about
that before or you might say well what's
the alternative well is there an
alternative well you have to get want
something from the person to even
interact with them it's like no you you
could want to see what
happens you could want to play
you could tell the
truth that's an interesting thing to do
because you don't know what's going to
happen if you tell the truth that's for
sure you could let go of what you want
and just say what you
think and you could presume and this is
an Act of Faith too that the truth does
set you free and that the truth that's
spoken properly makes out of possibility
the order that is habitable and good and
then you could just tell the truth and
you could see what happened
and that would be an adventure and
that's better than expediency partly
because maybe you're wrong about what
you
want you know and you know that because
you're kind of narrow and maybe narrowly
self-serving from time to time and your
purview of the world isn't as wide as it
could be and you're a bit bitter so you
tend to be that narrowly selfish because
of that so you want something from a
conversation and you bend and twist it
to get it it's like fine but
maybe you'll get something you don't
want or Worse you'll get something
that's positively bad for you that
happens a lot and so part of the reason
there's a deep moral injunction to tell
the
truth in a religious sense is
because there's a hypothesis behind that
which is there isn't anything better
that can happen to you than what will
happen to you if you tell the truth now
that might be hidden from you because
sometimes if you tell the truth and I
don't mean to blurt everything out
carelessly like this is a sophisticated
thing to do it's not careless doesn't
mean just say any old thing that pops
into your head you have to be judicious
with the truth but the notion would be
if something emerges as a consequence of
engaging truthfully and it doesn't seem
to be going your way
wait there's more to the story to unfold
cuz like how do you know if it goes your
way or not like over what time span are
you calculating this cuz sometimes
things can go pretty badly initially and
then much better as they progress and
lots of times the truth has that effect
because you know you you reveal
something that's maybe disturbing or or
shocking even to yourself and others and
it causes waves especially if it's a
deep truth and that destabilizes
everything it's like
yeah but maybe that's preferable to a
false piece
you can't find out if it's true without
doing it you're not going to gather the
evidence
beforehand so that's the true side of it
meaning pursue what's meaningful instead
of what's expedient it's another hint
like the spirit of play about the
pathway the yin and yangang symbol you
know the famous symbol it's two serpents
one black one white head to tail inside
the black serpent there's a white dot
and inside the White serpent there's a
black dot and the the representation is
something like the world of your
experience is made up of Chaos and Order
and order is where you are when things
are going according to what you want and
chaos is everything that can come in and
disrupt that and both of those can be
positive and negative too much order
tyranny right too much chaos nihilistic
uncertainty optimized
balance so let's think about what the
optimized balance would
mean you have
a a structure of perception and
conception that you inhabit it's
orderly reasonably orderly orderly
enough so that when you inhabit it most
of the time things are going the way you
want them to
go but things change and shift and you
don't know everything you should know so
you can't just stay where you are with a
good thing you have to
expand and as you expand you move out of
the domain of order into the domain of
chaos or out of the domain of actuality
into to the domain of
possibility and then you might think
well how do you know when you're doing
that optimally well one marker as I said
before maybe that you do it in a spirit
of play but another is and this is so
much worth
knowing things get
meaningful you know people ask does life
have any meaning it's like why is
anything worth doing if in 4 billion
years the Sun is going to envelop the
earth and the the answer to that
question is that's a stupid
question and I can prove that in some
sense it's like you're a mother and your
baby's crying and so you're going over
there to do something about it and
someone comes along and says why why do
you care if that baby's crying you know
in four billion years the Sun is going
to envelop the Earth and what's the
right response to that it's like it's
something like go away are you out of
your
mind and the answer to that question is
yes you you are out of your mind of
course you can find a time frame or a a
spatial frame of reference that makes
everything you do
pointless you know it's like what is
this going to matter in 20 trillion
years well it's
like the only proper response to that is
that's not a wise time frame imagine
you're in a you're in a concert you know
listen to some great music and it's got
you you know and someone Taps you on the
shoulder and you know this is going to
come to
end and what's your response like go
away and that's the right response to
that voice in your head that does those
things to you which says you know you're
engaged in something and an nihilistic
thought comes out well what's the point
of this given you know how unbearable
the world is and the current political
situation and the fact that we're
inhabiting some ball of dust on the edge
of some Fringe part of the cosmos and
that everything's dead in material it's
like get the behind me Satan right real
it's not a it's not a mark of
[Applause]
wisdom it's not a mark of wisdom to let
nihilistic demonic voices steal your Jah
deiv that is not a mark of wisdom and
you might object well at least it's not
naive it's like yeah cynicism might be
preferable to naivity but it doesn't
hold a candle to wisdom and that's worth
knowing too cuz once once you've been
hurt and you're cynical there's no going
back to naive but there's no point in
staying at cynical and there are degrees
of Courage Way Beyond cynicism and some
of that is the regaining of the faith
you had as a child despite your current
level of wisdom and that's something to
strive for right that's a moral
attainment that's not a burying your
head back in the sand quite the contrary
and so well back to the yin and yang
symbol
imagine you have an instinct that
orients
you well you do as a as a matter of fact
there's a reflex that's replicated at
multiple levels of your nervous system
and it's ancient if you have a nervous
system as an animal you have this reflex
and the reflex is something like
surprise you know if I walk across the
stage and I hear a loud noise behind me
I might go like this and that would be
automatic because I'm gripped by
unconscious systems and what's happening
is some chaos has emerged and it stops
me in my tracks because because
something unexpected happen my current
plan is incomplete and then I'll turn
and Orient towards the the place of the
disturbance and that's the beginning of
exploratory Behavior then I might run
away which might make me safe or I might
cautiously
investigate in which case I can find out
what caused the disturbance maybe
Rectify it and maybe update my plan so
that that sort of thing doesn't happen
happen again that's a better approach
[Music]